Pollution refers to the presence or introduction of harmful or toxic substances into the environment. In this case environment refers to all natural living and non living things those surround us. Forests, water bodies, air, oceans all constitute our natural environment and, any foreign substance that compromises their purity and longevity is termed as “Pollution”.

As per the recent 2018 EPI (Environmental Performance Index) statistics, India ranks 177 out of 180 countries in terms of air quality and overall environmental health; that’s a steep fall from 141st rank in 2016.

India is followed by the Democratic Republic of Congo on 178th rank, Bangladesh on 179th and Burundi on 180th. Top five nations with the best EPI index are Switzerland, France, Denmark, Malta and Sweden respectively.

LONG AND SHORT PARAGRAPHS ON POLLUTION IN ENGLISH
Below we have provided both long and short paragraphs on pollution of varying word lengths. These paragraphs will provide you in depth knowledge of the issues regarding environmental pollution. After going through them you will be able to define pollution and its types, state their causes, effects, solution and also means to prevent them. You can also select a paragraph of your choice, for a speech, competition or debate as per your requirement.

PARAGRAPH ON POLLUTION  (WORDS)
Environmental pollution refers to the presence of harmful and poisonous substances into our environment. It is not only limited to air pollution but can also affect water bodies, soil, forests, aquatic life and all the land living species as well. The main factors leading to environmental pollution are human generated.

Since ages we have been interfering with the environment in order to expand our habitat and to make living easy. Humans have invented automobiles, set up factories, cut down forests to make way for roads and cities – all compromising the environmental health. Inadequate waste disposal and its littering have resulted in polluting our oceans and water bodies, rendering them useless and threatening the life of the species which depend on them.

 

PARAGRAPH ON POLLUTION  ( WORDS)
Pollution has tremendous adverse affects on environment, resulting in its degradation and also in depletion of living species. It has severe aftereffects like acid rain, global warming, famine, draught and extreme climatic conditions along with other consequences. The most common type of pollution is air pollution. The air we breathe today in metropolis or cities is choked with toxic CO (Carbon Monoxide, CO2 (Carbon di- oxide), N2O (Nitrous Oxide) and CH4 (Methane). Inhalation of these gases not only leads to respiratory ailments in humans but also CO2 is a potent green house gas leading to escalated green house effect and global warming.

Transportation industry causes 25% of the global green house gas emission; subsequently, resulting in green house effect and a raised earth’s average surface temperature. Earth’s average surface temperature is constantly rising and is estimated to rise by around 1.8 by the end of present century. Even the temperature of oceans is on rise, though at a slower rate owing to the ocean’s larger heat absorbing capacity.

 

PARAGRAPH ON POLLUTION  (WORDS)
Though air pollution is the most common type of pollution evident today, it is not the only one. Besides air pollution, there are a number of human induced activities those pollute or natural resources like water bodies and soil. Inadvertent industrialization has led to air as well as water pollution, having adverse affects on environmental health. Industries require a good amount of water to operate and so are mainly set up in proximity to a naturally occurring stream, river or water body.

Also, the industrial waste which includes toxic chemicals like asbestos etc is carried away into our water bodies by using fresh water. It not only pollutes our natural water resources but also renders them harmful to use and results in decline of species, plants and algae.

Another most common factor threatening the health of water resources and soil is – littering. Inadequate mechanism of waste disposal and ignorance results in littering at various places. The most common type of pollutant through littering is plastic. Thin plastic bags of varied dimensions, when not disposed properly; get into our water bodies and soil. Being non degradable they stay there for centuries, polluting them and threatening lives. Species like turtles and fishes are known to have eaten plastic and died.

 

PARAGRAPH ON POLLUTION  ( WORDS)
Pollution is the most immediate threat to our environment and is a global concern. It affects the air, water bodies, forests, vegetation, soil, oceans and other natural resources, having long lasting and fatal consequences. Every major pollutant which threatens the environment is produced by human activities. In their desire to progress and expand their boundaries, humans have done considerable damage to the environment.

Natural resources have not only been used incessantly but also polluted, without considering the after affects. We just don’t realize the fact that the natural resources that we pollute today have taken Millions of years to be produced.

 

 

Today human induced pollution has become so vast that no corner of the world is isolated from its affects. People are suffering from respiratory diseases, given to the toxic fumes emitted out of factories and automobiles. Places across the globe are witnessing extreme hot and cold climatic conditions as result of global warming. Famine and droughts have become common with depleting natural water resources.

Galactic and polar ice is melting as a result of global warming, consequently resulting in raised ocean level and floods. Also, the rise in oceanic temperature and plastic pollution results in depletion of marine species like – planktons, coral fish, seals, great barrier reef etc.

Deforestation too results in raised air pollution level as forest act as natural air filters – cleaning the air by absorbing harmful gases and emitting oxygen. They act as natural air filters, without them earth would be like nothing else than a large ball of smoke. Unless we realize the severity of the damage that we have done and take preventing measures on war footing; our future generations will live in poor health and despair.